---
title: 2.8 Exceptions
---

#### **about prelude exceptions**

------

*prelude* exceptions extend *mu* exceptions and capture the dynamic environment when the exception was raised.


***exceptp*** *exception* => *generalized boolean*

<hr>
<div class="list">
<span class="dfn">exception</span> : an <span class="dfn">object</span></br>
</div>


*exceptp* is the *prelude* exception type predicate.



***exceptf*** *stream* *format-string* *printenv* *exception* => *()*

<hr>

<div class="list">
<span class="dfn">stream</span> : an <span class="dfn">output stream-designator</span></br>
<span class="dfn">format-string</span> : a <span class="dfn">string</span> acceptable to prelude:format</br>
<span class="dfn">printenv</span> : a <span class="dfn">generalized boolean</span></br>
<span class="dfn">exception</span> : a <span class="dfn">string</span></br>
</div>


*exceptf* prints a human-readable description of *exception* on *stream* by *prelude:format*.
If *printenv* is false, the captured environment will not be printed.


***with-exception*** *handler* *thunk* => *form*

<hr>

<div class="list">
<span class="dfn">handler</span> : an <span class="dfn">exception</span> handler function</br>
<span class="dfn">thunk</span> : a <span class="dfn">function</span></br>
</div>

*handler* is a function of one argument, a *prelude* exception. *thunk* is a function of no arguments.

*with-exception* executes *thunk*. If an exception is raised while executing *thunk*, a *prelude* exception
is created and *handler* is called with it as the sole argument. In this case, *with-exception* returns whatever
*handler* returns. If no exception is raised, *with-exception* returns whatever *thunk* returns.



*exceptf* prints a human-readable description of *exception* on *stream* by *prelude:format*.


***break*** *exception*

<hr>

<div class="list">
<span class="dfn">exception</span> : an <span class="dfn">exception</span> object</br>
</div>


*break* prints the *exception* via *prelude:exceptf* and enters an interactive loop.


***error*** *format-string* *value*

<hr>

<div class="list">
<span class="dfn">format-string</span> : a <span class="dfn">string</span> acceptable to prelude:format</br>
<span class="dfn">value</span> : an <span class="dfn">object</span></br>
</div>


*error* prints *value* with *prelude:format*, creates an exception object, and raises it. *error* does not return.


***raise*** *value* *source* *reason*

<hr>

<div class="list">
<span class="dfn">value</span> : an <span class="dfn">object</span></br>
<span class="dfn">source</span> : a <span class="dfn">symbol</span></br>
<span class="dfn">erason</span> : a <span class="dfn">string</span></br>
</div>


*raise* creates an exception object and raises it. *source* is the symbol of whatever function called *raise*
and *reason* is a string explaining why the exception was raised. *raise* does not return.



***warn*** *value* *message* => *value*

<hr>

<div class="list">
<span class="dfn">value</span> : an <span class="dfn">object</span></br>
<span class="dfn">message</span> : a <span class="dfn">string</span></br>
</div>

Intended primarily for debugging, *warn* does not raise an exception. It prints *value* and
*message* on a single line formatted as a comment to *mu:err-out*. *warn* returns *value*.
